feeling about finally getting into the war well it
wasn't really that you know I was glad to get in the
war I just felt like it was a continuation of what
I'd been doing right I had been accepting all the
assignments been given to me and it's been my lot to
stay in the states four years my wife was with me all
that time sure I'd had even though it was black
outfit we'd had pretty good success. We'd had lots
of accommodations, and so the assignment to
Europe... You did have a lot of accommodations?
Oh, we did. We did. Uh, both as individual, uh,
individuals and units, and we accomplished a lot
of things. But, uh, really, it was just another
assignment. I didn't really feel like, well, here
I come in Europe, or gosh, I've got to go to Europe.
You know, just, that's it. You just wanted to do
your duty regardless of it. That's correct. Okay,
then when you got overseas, can you tell me about
your assignment there?
Yeah, we left the States sometime in February.
Went to Europe, had a Really had a fine trip over as
far as war trips go. We were on a South American
liner of the Uruguay, which was a converted
pleasure. Very nice ship. 5,000
troops. And the officers were traveling in a
different status than a lot of people did. We ate
courtesy of the ship. So you probably had good
food. Oh, gosh. We had a printed menu. Printed
menu. And the table of four officers had an
individual waiter. We did. Now that sounds
strange to a lot of people for a troop ship at that
stage of the war, but we did. We had a Hungarian boy
that waited on the table. And we had a printed menu,
and we ate three meals a day. The darndest thing
that you've ever seen. It was absolutely... I
brought one of the menus home, and my wife couldn't
believe it. How about the enlisted men? What kind
of treatment did they have? Well, they ate in child
lines, and they had good food. It was... Because I
went many times down through the child lines with
them, but they... They, like all the other troop
ship soldiers, I'm sure, lined up and went through
a sort of a fix-your-tray-line type thing. And I
never did understand that. It really was not good
for morale, I'm sure. No. But that was the
dictates. We paid for this. The U.S. government?
Oh, I'm sure they did. In other words, they just
hired a— Took over the ship in some manner. However
they— And it was run by Uruguayans? I don't really
know who ran the ship, but they called it— No, it was
a South American liner, probably headquartered
in New York or somewhere prior to the war, but I
really don't know who owned the Uruguay. It was a—
But it was a pleasure boat of some sort. But this
Hungarian cabin boy, he was some cabin boy. One of
the things that was always interesting to me, he
felt offended if you wouldn't take a little bit of
each entree on his menu. Oh, sir, he was so good, you
know. He was just trying to promote his food. But he
was right. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. So, how
much did he gain, how many pounds did he gain on that
trip? I was doing pretty smart. But it was a 12-day
voyage. The first three of them were, we went up
high in the Atlantic and it was a rough, rough seas.
We went convoy. I remember the ships, I mean a lot of
them. Destroyers? Yes. You could see them
circling all the way around. first three days we
had terribly rough seas we got in one storm that it
was so rough that it broke some of the lifeboats off
of the davits and that you could hear them falling
down the side of the ship and i was on duty one
morning with my troops and uh sitting a chair at the
head of the stairs and it got so rough that i just had
to hold around the rail you know you couldn't
you're nothing would stay still. Garbage cans
would come down the hallways and people try to walk
and you'd have to hold on to rails you know it it was
terribly rough. I never did get sick but I sure
didn't feel good for a couple of days. But finally
it's moved out and we got on over to landed in Le
Havre. We missed England. At that time they were
going directly into France. They had opened up Le
Havre and we went in on a temporary pier that they
had built. And that was in February 1945? 1945,
that's correct. And we were moved out to one of the
camps out from Le Havre where they set you up to
de-process and get your equipment back with you
and unwrap it. All tools had to be wrapped and
waterproofed and all this to go overseas. We got
all of our shop trucks back and got the tools
unwrapped and got ready to be operational. And we
were ordered up to Hasselt, Belgium.
real interesting one of the movies recently where
Eisenhower
had to meet with Montgomery to straighten out some
command problems they went to Hasselt and it
showed the depot up there and here's Hasselt,
Belgium that sort of brought back memories to me.
Did you ever did you ever get to see either one of
those? No not over there. So we went on we went to
Hasselt and uh I was just entirely on my own. Nobody
told me where to camp or where to put up or whatever.
So I sent one of my officers out to find us a villa to
live in. The British had the town majors who were
sort of like mayors who had taken over for
management and running various towns. We found an
empty villa. And so we went to the town major, and he
said, move in. So we moved in, moved the whole
company in this big Belgian villa. Was that like a
hotel then? No, just a big home. Just a big home. And
it was about three stories, big grounds. Had my
company office there. All the vehicles would be
parked around on the grounds. And then the
officers and the key non-commissioned officers
were authorized to go out and live on the economy,
that is, have quarters. We'd go find some Belgian
that was willing to take us in his home, and we lived
in their homes. And I know they were reimbursed in
some manner, but this town major would take us.
Like you're renting a room from them? Yeah, that's
right. Really? Yeah. How'd you get along with
those people? Real fine. They were really
receptive to us, of course. They were happy to be on
board. Another awesome... Room and board? No,
just room. We ate with the company. I lived with an
old Belgian lady and her teenage daughter. Her
husband was a captive. The daughter had been
captured and still was unheard from. One son had
been, he had gone off to the RAF and he'd been shot
down. So they were really tied up in the war. And
they'd have one fireplace in the whole building.
We'd sit around at night, you know, running their
fire and they'd talk. They spoke English. Enough
we could understand. Yeah. Her husband was a
mining engineer, and the Germans had captured
him, and I'm sure had used his mining talents. But
we had a real interesting living there. We stayed
there about 30 days, and finally were ordered to
liaise Belgium to be assigned to a depot, a big
engineer depot. It was straddle of the Albert
Canal and several of those other canals there, and
all the supplies came in by water. And this depot
unloaded everything with cranes. That's a drag
line crane. They had about 40 of those things in
that depot, and my job was to maintain those cranes
and take equipment that had come back off the front
and either repair it or salvage it, whichever. If
it was where we could feasibly repair it and put it
back in the depot, we'd do so. Now that's water
pumps, bulldozers, motor graders, any type of
engineer equipment. It would come back. Were your
men trained well enough? That's right. They were
trained to do this work. That's correct. We had
shops where we could make parts, you know, relays.
Machine shops, all these mobile type machine
shops where they had all these things in these
closed-in
cab type trucks. Very talented group of people.
And it was our sole responsibility when a piece of
equipment came back to say that it's either
repaired or thrown away. My shop officer had that
sole responsibility. It was his judgment to say we
fix it or throw it away. If we fixed it, it went back
into the depot. If it was not salvable in any
manner, then the depot would issue a new one to the
using unit. So we got some stuff back off the front
that was in terrible shape. I would imagine. But it
was interesting. It was really an interesting
assignment.
We stayed with that until,
oh, must have been about somewhere like
October or November of that year. The war was over.
We had been in the States so long, we didn't have
many points. You know what points were. We didn't
have many, or I didn't have many points. So I was not
eligible for rotation. Let me back up just a little
bit. We were originally scheduled to go to the
South Pacific, but the war was over, so we did not
go, and we stayed in that area because they didn't
have many points. What was there to do now that the
damage from the battle was over? Well, after we got
After we got sidetracked from going to Europe, I
mean to South Pacific, then I was assigned to this
labor supervision company because of my
engineering ability, background, and that was a
German staffed company. It was German PWs.
Really? German PWs. That's fascinating. German
soldiers and German officers. Okay, well let's
talk about that in a minute here, but before we
leave your last assignment, let's just, you were
in the northern, let's talk about this, you were in
the northern zone, which was basically the zone of
the British Army under Montgomery. What were the
relationships, what were the relations like
between the American and British soldiers, do you
remember? I had no contact to that problem. I've I
operated under this depot commander, and I never
got in combat at all. Right, but I just thought that
maybe you might—you never repaired any British
equipment? No. They had their own— That's right.
The only thing—everybody knew of the problem, and
everybody talked about the British, and all they
could do was convoy up and down the road and stop for
tea when it came time to do so. You know, we didn't
have... But it was sort of common knowledge that
there was a problem? Oh, yes, absolutely. But how
profound do you think this problem was? Or was it
just a matter of the Americans or, you know, the
Yangs making fun of the British? No, I think it was a
real problem. I think it really was. And I think the
big part of it, and, of course, I've learned a lot of
this subsequent, was in the upper structures of
command. Yeah, sure. There's no question it was a
problem. I expect as far as an American soldier or
American company working with a British company,
there probably wasn't any of that. It's a matter of
getting along. But it's common knowledge, but I
had no contact with that sort of thing at all. Okay,
now let's move on. Then the war is over. Let's move
on to the labor. Okay. the labor company. What was
your job there for such to find them? Okay I was
assigned to command this labor supervision
company which was I believe about 250 German PWs
and there was I believe I had three German officers
at that time and we were winterizing and
electrifying these redeployment camps where the
soldiers were coming back to go through
Marseilles and go home or wherever. And these
camps were where they came in. Their equipment was
all turned in. They were issued new clothes.
Records were all processed so that they could go
from there directly to Marseilles to get on a boat.
That's the reason they called it a redeployment
camp. We were taking these tents, these big
paramdo tents, putting wood floors in them,
putting wood parapets around the edges to protect
them from the cold weather, putting electric
lights into them, and building streets and roads
around through them. But I was one of about 10 of
those labor supervision companies in this one
camp, one headquarters. Where was this in France?
It was in Calais, north of Marseille. We had this
prisoner of war camp with, I expect there were
6,000 PWs. 6,000. I imagine there were. And real
strange, PWs guarded the PWs. Really? Yeah. That
is strange. Yeah. We had German PWs on the gate. Of
course, we'd have an American sergeant there, but
we didn't have near enough Americans to do all the
guarding. But you didn't have to worry about those
guys being in camp at night, because the French
would catch them out, and then they wouldn't even
come back. That's right. So at nighttime, those
Germans wanted to be in that camp, in that
compound. So they went out and worked as a company
in this Calais area. I had one engineer officer in
my company, and then three Germans, and they
were... not graduate engineers, but engineers to
the degree that they could supervise carpentry
and electric and this sort of thing.
They supervised these 250 people during the day,
marshed them back at night, and put them in the
compound. And I had to inspect the work and see that
it The officers signed the morning report. What
was the quality of the work? Excellent. Good
workers? Excellent. Every one of them knew a
trade. Really? Every German had some skill.
That's something that we could pattern after. We
had a little craft shop there where we'd let them
work off times and build various things, you know.
And one of them might be a wood inlayer. another
might be a brick mason another one an expert at
electricity and you know various things they
could just absolutely fascinate you with the
craftsmen that they were so it was a it was an
interesting assignment I was with that from oh I
guess this September October whenever until the
next February General Butler had quite a few good
things to say about the quality of German
soldiers. Would you agree? Oh, absolutely. They
were absolutely outstanding. Outstanding. How
could you compare a German soldier with American
soldiers? Well, I'd say across the board he was as
good or better. When I say as good or better, they
were strong. I guess they were more specialists
than our people were. But I think it must have been a
dictate from parents or somebody over there. They
had to learn a trade of some kind. And they were
highly skilled. Did you ever get to know the German
officers? Did you ever converse with them? Or did
they only speak German? Or did you ever have any
personal relations with them? Well, the German
officers that I had could not speak English, so I
really didn't discuss much with them except
direct them to go over this and that. But there were
about 15 or 16 American officers in this camp, and
we each had our own little headquarters or on
little quarters and we had German orderlies to
take care of the cleaning and this sort of thing and
I conversed with those people to a great degree. We
picked most of them because they could speak
English and they'd come and clean our quarters and
make our beds and wash our clothes and you know
various things like that. And I had an interesting
The one that I had was from the Russian sector of
Germany. He was happy to be in France. He didn't
want to go home. He didn't want to go home. And he
told me, and this was real strange, and I didn't
really take it at the time as being insubordinate,
but he told me, he said, Captain, he said,
Americans will learn that they fought the wrong
people. And at the time, it didn't make much of an
impact. But I have thought about that 10,000
times. He was so right. He was absolutely so right.
But here's a little private, a little
insignificant private. And he was so apologetic.
He said, pardon me, sir. I want to tell you
something. I beg your pardon. You know, they were
real humble when they went down. He said,
Americans will learn that they fought their own
people. The private show didn't know what he was
talking about. It would really be interesting to
know what happened to that little fella, because
he told me he didn't know
anything. But it was a great experience I had.
Yeah, to be in command of this. That's right. I
learned a whole lot from him. It was something
different.
How about food and health and living conditions
for prisoners of war? Let's move this over here.
How about things like that, food, health, living
conditions for the prisoners of war? Well, the
only ones I know of were the ones that I was directly
in contact with. They had little tents. And we
provided some beds. And the Red Cross had provided
some blankets for them to put on. There wasn't much
to their beds. Most of them were made probably out
of boards or some plywood or something like that.
But they had adequate food. It was prepared in one
central kitchen in this compound. Of course, I
really didn't have any responsibility for
preparing the food, and I never ate over there, but
I know that they told me they had plenty. It was hot,
and it wasn't a bunch of goop all mixed up. It was
food that was prepared properly. So I think my
particular compound, I doubt that they had very
much to complain about. Had plenty of food. In
other words, the prisoners of war you thought were
treated fairly well after a rather savage
six-year ordeal. That's right. I imagine from the
last probably two years of their service,
wherever they were, with the destitute
conditions that Jeremy had gotten in, I'm sure
they were a whole lot better off in an American
compound being looked after. than they were back
in their homeland scratching for something to
eat. Because Germany was starving in 1945, 1946.
Absolutely. Did you have an opportunity to travel
to Germany? Yes, just to go. On like a leave? No,
just get in the vehicle and drive up just to look.
But not to speak of. The only thing that I really saw
of Germany was I got to know an Air Force pilot, and
he took me one time on a reconnaissance flight. We
went up over
Aachen, Cologne, the Bavarian Alps, just made a
big circle up the Ruhr and the Rhine to look at the
damage and the bombs. That's the most extensive
opportunity to see Germany that I got was in an
A-26, when these attacked bombers. And other than
that, I'd just get in the Jeep, and we'd just drive
across the border and come back. But I saw a whole
lot of Europe, because when I had this engineering
maintenance company, they assigned one of my
platoons to Antwerp. And to get there, I had to go
through, go into, of course, from Belgium to
Holland and then up into Antwerp. And they were in
Antwerp while the buzz bombs were falling. In
fact, my company got a bronze star or whatever it
was because of the buzz bombs falling. My troops
were up there helping maintain the port equipment
at the port of Antler. Keep the port open. Right.
And the Germans tried to knock the port out, of
course. But that sojourn with the Germans was
something that I'm glad is on the record.
Were you happy to come home in 1946? Oh,
absolutely. And I had not been there, of course,
near like a lot of them. I was really just gone a
year. I left in February and got back in February
but I was of course glad to get home. A couple of
strange things. I really don't know how I got
assigned to this transportation company coming
home but I was assigned to a transportation
company and I forgot whether I listed it down there
or not but
No, these were the labor suit. Anyhow, the company
that I came home with was a transportation
company. And of course, all the shipping was under
the transportation court. So belonging to a
transportation company, we sort of got a little
favored treatment on the way home. because we were
transportation, and of course the ship was
transportation. Right, right. So you had a
pleasure craft on the way over and on the way back.
But I did get some assignments. I was assigned as
the police and prison officer for the ship coming
home, which meant that I had to see that the place
was cleaned up and kept orderly and all this all
over the ship. That was my assignment coming home.
But the fact that I was on the So the staff, the
captain of the ship, whatever they called him at
that time, had me eat with him a number of times in
his cabin. I came back on a Liberty ship, a Victory
ship, I guess it was. But I did have an interesting
assignment coming home. I made many trips around
that ship in those 12 days because I'd have to go in
the morning first thing and then when the colonel
inspected the ship i had to go back and travel over
the whole ship with him when he made his inspection
and he went every day too so the time must have gone
pretty fast it did it was i enjoyed having some
responsibility but uh eating with the captain was
almost like eating with the uh with the uh south
american liner i betcha
and Another strange coincidence, we left out, I
guess it's strange, we left out, we went through
Weehawken, New Jersey, went to New York, Pier 31, I
believe it was, boarded the ship. Coming back, we
got off on Pier 31, got on a ferry boat, went right
back to Weehawken, right back to Camp Cameron, New
Jersey. I mean, exactly backtrack. Didn't even,
same pier, got off the same pier. So that's, that is
sort of strange. I was, I was wondering, you were
discharged from active duty in 1946.
Many people in America were rather worried about
falling back into a depression after the war.
about job opportunities or a number of popular
opinion polls taken, which all demonstrated that
the American people were slightly or rather
insecure about their future. Were you at all
worried about your future when you got out in 1946?
No, because I had a leave of absence from the
highway department, had a guaranteed return job,
and the highway department had had not been able to
expend monies on highways for four years because
of material and equipment. And they were 20 years
behind. They had tons of work. Had tons of work and
lots of money to do it with. And it was a matter of
them getting geared up to do it. And they were
taking back everybody that left them and a lot of
people that wanted to come back and work. So
really, I had a very bright future. No problems at
all. I went right back to work. And we just had work
running out our ears. So I was not faced with that
problem. Would you consider that you had
indefinite aims and goals when you got out of the
service in 46? Oh, yeah. I was going back to the
highway department to be a highway engineer. That
was my aim from the time I was 11 years old. Right. I
was still in the same pipeline. Okay. Now, then
let's turn back to your career again, your
post-war career in the Reserves. Why'd you decide
to stay in the Reserves? Well, I had heard some of
the people back in the late 20s and early 30s talk
about the interest they'd had in the Reserve and
The fact that it had enhanced them during World War
II. A lot of them had been promoted over those
years. A lot of them had gotten a lot of longevity.
And so I went to looking for a place that I could get
in an active reserve outfit. Also, it was thought
that there would be a retirement someday for a
reserve program. I'm not I don't know exactly what
the status of retirement was at that time but I
think there was a program whereby at the end of 20
years you you had some built-in uh yeah uh